Stretching across the heart of the European
continent, from the Mediterranean Cote d’Azure to
the banks of the Danube River in Vienna, the
crescent shaped Alps form a roughly 1,200 kilometer
long fortress, roughly equivalent to the
distance from Chicago to Florida. The 8
countries within and around its domain have
been shaped by the Alps’ summits and valleys,
its glaciers and and its meadows for thousands
of years and to this day, its impenetrability and
beauty continue to influence the politics
and cultural identity of central Europe.
To fully understand what makes the Alps
so special for the European continent,
let’s embark on a journey from the coast of the
Ligurian Sea to its transition into the Dinaric
Alps and the Great Hungarian Plain, looking at how
its peaks and valleys created deep glacial lakes,
strange border quirks, vital trade routes and some
of the world’s most iconic mountain landscapes.
Chapter 1 - The Western Alps
On Italy’s narrow Ligurian coast, the Western
Alps begin almost at the water’s edge, rising
sharply behind the last coastal hills. Here, where
the last ridges of the Apennines taper out, the
Alpine arc takes over. From this narrow coastal
pass, the ridgelines quickly spread out across
southeastern France, filling a 180‑kilometer‑wide
mountain corridor that gradually bends eastwards
around the Italian Po Valley. In this southwestern
section of the Alps, near the high reaches of the
pyramidal Monviso, the Po, Italy’s longest river,
is born. From here it flows eastward, draining
almost the entire southern flank of the Alps
before emptying into the Adriatic Sea. This river
constitutes one of the 4 major drainage basins
of the Alps, with the Rhone, Rhine and Danube
each draining one of the cardinal directions.
The French–Italian border along the main chain
of the Alps is lined with parks on both sides
that protect these high‑alpine landscapes and
their fragile ecosystems of conifer forests
in the valleys to lichens clinging to the
highest ridges. At the same time however,
France walks a tightrope here, operating
some of the largest ski resorts on Earth,
like Les Trois Vallées, La Plagne or Tignes,
right between these protected high‑mountain areas.
The tallest summit of this region is
called the Barre des Écrins, which up
until the French Annexation of Savoir in
1860, and with it, the Mont Blanc Massif,
stood as the tallest mountain of France. At 4101
meters above sea level it allows for spectacular
views into the neighbouring region, where most
of the Alps most famous landmarks can be found.
Home to many of the highest and
most iconic mountains in the Alps,
including the Mont Blanc, the Dufourspitze and
the Matterhorn, it also holds the quintessential
alpine villages and landscapes most people think
of when they imagine the Alps. Shared by France,
Italy and a large part of Switzerland,
its mountain pastures helped give rise
to a thriving chocolate and cheese industry, but
not everything here is as harmonious as it looks.
Since the 19th century, conflicting views
of the exact border have turned the summit
of Mont Blanc into a sensitive topic. France
claims full authority over the mountain,
pointing to its role in building infrastructure,
running rescue services and controlling access
to the summit. Italy, however, argues that
the border should follow the main watershed,
which would make the highest peak of the Mont
Blanc massif a shared summit, as is the case
for most other major peaks along the Alps.
France's claim is reinforced by the presence
of Chamonix, a village on the western foothills
of the mountain which acts as the mountaineering
gateway to central Europe’s highest peak.
Chamonix is so closely tied to the history
of mountain sports that it also became
the birthplace of the Winter Olympics,
with the very first edition held here in 1924.
Following the French and Swiss border with Italy
eastwards, we encounter many more of the Alps’
most iconic peaks. The pyramidical summit of
the Matterhorn, nicknamed “the Mountain of
Mountains” has long been the emblem of the
mountain range as a whole, while summits like the
Dufourspitze are a point of national Swiss pride,
with its summit lying entirely on Swiss soil.
The peak is named after the Swiss general and
cartographer Guillaume-Henri Dufour, who spent
two decades leading a detailed triangulation of
the country. The result was a 25‑sheet series
that, for the first time, showed every summit,
glacier and valley of Switzerland with
striking accuracy. The set of maps was
so influential that it helped shape the very
idea of Switzerland as a unified alpine nation.
During the period when Dufour’s map
series was being created, many of the
most dangerous mountains of the north‑western
Alps were climbed for the first time. Swiss,
Austrian, French and British alpinists
pushed their way up dozens of glaciated
four‑thousand‑meter summits in what became
known as the golden age of alpinism. It began
with the first ascent of the Wetterhorn,
towering above the village of Grindelwald,
and over the next ten years led to the first
successful climbs of many of these ice giants,
culminating in the first ascent
of the Matterhorn in 1865.
At first, mountaineers chose the most accessible
routes, but as time went on, equipment improved
and the drive for more challenging terrain grew,
the harder lines began to look more attractive.
Several of the peaks first climbed during the
golden age of alpinism have especially daunting
routes on their north faces, and together
they became known as
the “Great North Faces of the Alps"
These dramatic walls rise above some of
the largest surviving icefields of the Alps.
Contained behind the Eiger and surrounded by
many more jewels of the Bernese Alps, the ocean of
ice extends for over 22 kilometers along the south
face of the Bernese Alps, forming the longest
and largest glacier of the Alps. Centuries ago,
before the advent of mechanical refrigeration,
the glacier was cut up and exported across Europe,
but in modern times, the ice has become a lot
more cared for. Throughout the last 100 years,
the Bernese Alps have lost around
half of the total glacier cover,
and continuous melting thins out the
remaining glaciers by roughly 70 cm per year,
creating an uncertain future for these iceworlds.
During the peak of the last Ice Age, the glacial
cover extended far beyond today's limits and
the slow but grinding flow of these ice masses
eroded deep basins around the edge of
the main Alpine chain. As the glaciers
retreated from these margins, meltwater of
the remnants slowly filled up the depressions
carved out by the ice, creating some of the
most picturesque mountain lakes in the world.
Especially on the southern borders of Switzerland,
Lake Maggiore, Lake Lugano and Lake Como lie in a
narrow transition zone between the harsh alpine
and the soft mediterranean climate, resulting
in an epitome of tranquility, where densely
forested mountain slopes are rising steeply
above terraced gardens, citrus trees and medieval
architecture in the mirroring lake surface.
From the easternmost of these lakes, Lake Como,
a line drawn northwards through Liechtenstein and to
Lake Constance marks the end of the Western Alps.
But before we get into the second part of this
video, did you know that these Alps aren’t the
only mountain range in the world
called “Alps”. The main mountains of the South Island of New Zealand
are called theSouthern Alps, which is something I only found out
after playing the Mountain Ranges game in the app
Jordglobe geography, the sponsor of this video.
Chances are, if you are enjoying this video, you
already enjoy looking at maps and learning about
the geographical intricacies of our planet a
bit more than the average person. Jordglobe
Geography is here to turn that into a game,
where you visually study countries, cities,
flags, states, capitals, even planets and much
more. I personally especially like the daily
quiz which ties history and contemporary facts
together with Geography, or the 1v1 duel mode,
where you can challenge friends and online
users in a global battle of general knowledge.
So, if you want a more interactive way to
deepen the knowledge of the topics that we’re
already discussing on this channel, download
Jordglobe Geography for free on Google Play
or the App Store. I’ll leave the link in the
description below and now, let's continue with
the second half of the Alps.
Chapter 2: The Eastern Alps
Leaving the enormous peaks of the Western Alps
behind, the mountain range as a whole becomes
a bit more mellow. While the Western Alps boast
a total of 81 summits surpassing the 4000 meter
mark, the Eastern Alps only have one: the Piz
Bernina near the alpine resort of St. Moritz.
Its name makes it immediately identifiable as
southern Swiss, because the prefix “Piz” is
used for many major summits in Romansh, the fourth
national language of Switzerland that is prevalenthere.
Justone ridgeline behind the glamour of the Engadin
Valley, the small village of Juf is tucked away in
a narrow side valley. At first glance, the homes
of its roughly thirty inhabitants might seem quite
unremarkable, but at an elevation of about 2,100
meters, Juf is actually the highest permanently
inhabited settlement in the entire Alpine arc.
That elevation may not sound particularly
impressive at first, especially when you
think of countries like Bolivia, Ecuador or
Mexico, where national capitals with millions
of inhabitants sit far above 2,100 meters. But
that is not really a fair comparison to the Alps.
Because of the Alps' more northerly position,
they experience a generally colder climate,
and their steep, rocky slopes create a sharp upper
limit for forests and meadows, especially in the
northern part of the range. Above the tree line,
villages are far more exposed to wind, cold and
snow, which makes permanent settlement at higher
elevations nearly impossible. Yet, in the pockets
where it is possible, the jagged topography
has resulted in some strange border anomalies.
Following the German–Austrian border eastwards
from Lake Constance, a lone valley with several
villages strung together on a single road is
surrounded by mountains on almost all sides.
These villages are certainly within Austrian
Territory, yet the road connecting them only
leads to Germany. This paradoxically makes them
an Austrian enclave, within Austrian territory,
at least when looking at road transport.
Just 40 kilometers northward, a second border
peculiarity reveals itself between Austria
and Germany, with a little island of Austria
sticking out of the mainland, only touching the
continuous Austria at a single geometric point,
creating something very close to a quadripoint
border. There has only been a single instance in
mapped history where a true quadripoint existed,
which lasted for eight months between Chad,
Nigeria, British Cameroon and French
Cameroon in central Africa. But for now
this is the closest that we have, even if it
is shared by just two countries and not four.
Following the alpine foothills further east,
dozens of mountain lakes across the German and
Austrian Pre-Alps collect the meltwater
from the northern flanks of the Alps,
similar to how lakes Maggiore, Lugano, Como
and Garda store the southern meltwater.
The most photogenic one of these is the little Lake
Hallstatt, whose iconic church spire stands in
front of the magnificent forested slopes of the
Dachstein, a mountain range containing one of the
most spectacular natural phenomena of the Alps.
Deep inside this mountain range, a fissure
dating back to when tectonic forces folded
up the Alps has been further washed out by
the headwaters of the Salzach, creating one of the
most intricate cave networks in the entire world. Today,
a network of 42 kilometers, or 26 miles,
is buried deep inside the limestone massif,
of which the first kilometer is accessible to
visitors. The system’s multiple entrances create
a powerful chimney effect, with air constantly
circulating through the mountain and keeping the
caves at near‑freezing temperatures year‑round.
Water seeping in through the soluble limestone
freezes almost instantly when it meets the
cold air currents, forming mesmerizing ice
pillars at the entrances and helping to
create the largest ice cave in the world.
Standing even taller than the rocky Dachstein,
and located almost in the center of the Eastern
Alps, Grossglockner, with nearly 3,800
meters above sea level is the highest mountain in
Austria. Since its first ascent in 1800, it
has been a major alpine tourism destination,
and today a total of around 30 ascent routes
have been mapped across its countless ridges,
chutes, glaciers and rock faces. From the
summit, its exceptional topographic prominence
and isolation allow for sweeping views over
the surrounding Hohe Tauern National Park,
the largest national park in the Alps and a vast
high‑mountain barrier at the heart of the range.
Throughout this whole section of the Alps,
the countless ridges and valleys are primarily
oriented in an east-west direction, which has
complicated the traversing of the Alps ever since
people tried to make this part of Europe their
home. Today there are only a few major passes
which allow for high capacity north-south travel.
While marvels of modern engineering like the 57km
long Gotthard Base Tunnel provide a significant
shortcut for rail traffic, heavy vehicle roads
are rare due to many passes relying on steep
hairpin turns which make it impractical for
larger trucks to pass. Only a handful of mountain
saddles are mellow enough for trucks to handle
and the Brenner Pass at the Austrian Italian
Border is the most famous and busy one. Nearly
one third of all road freight passes the Alps
through this narrow corridor, and its benefits
have been known to human civilizations for
millennia now. Even during ancient Roman times,
armies and traders used the Brenner Pass to access
central Europe from the Italian peninsula, but it
is far from the only route that people utilized.
Following the main traffic artery from the Brenner
Pass southwards, we approach the South Tyrolean
Capital of Bolzano and to our left, the final
region of our journey across the Alps rises above
the valleys and stretches all the way to the
eastern Po Valley: The Dolomites. Characterized
by rugged pale rock outcrops that are rising
sharply over the lush green meadows with tranquil
villages and hiking paths. This color stands in
stark contrast to the darker granite towers of
Switzerland, hinting at the various rocklayers
that have been uplifted during the creation of the
Alps. The Dolomites have been named after the rock
type dolomite which is a sedimentary carbonate
rock, originating from the seabed of the ancient
Tethys Ocean and its distinct fracture planes
allow for the formation of the steep mountain
faces, angled ridge lines and cliffs, which
make the towers of the Dolomites so iconic.
Where the area truly shines however is during
the winter, when millions of mountain sport
enthusiasts flock into the many ski resorts of
the dolomites. Starting in 1974, 9 of these ski
resorts formed a union among themselves, adding
cross resort lifts to connect the slopes and
villages, with a total of 7 more having been added
since. Together this Dolomiti Superski area now
covers a total of 1246 slope kilometers, with over
half of them being connected to each other and all
of them being accessible with a single pass, making it the largest ski resort on the planet
As a global winter sports hotspot, the Dolomites
will get the honor to host the Winter Olympics for
the second time their history. Together with the city
of Milano, Cortina d'Ampezzo will invite the world
for the 2026 winter olympics, to continue a long
lasting dominance of hosting the Winter Olympics
in the Alps. Of the 27 winter olympics which have
been held or are currently planned, since the
first edition in 1924, 45% of them have been held
in the French, Italian, Swiss, German or Austrian
sections of the Alps. This goes to show just how
culturally significant the Alps are, not just
for Central Europe, but for the world as a whole.
Farther east, the mountains gradually lose
height and splinter into the Julian Alps of
Slovenia before melting into the Dinaric
Alps and the open lowlands of the Great
Hungarian Plain. Here, the last Alpine
foothills give way to rolling farmland,
marking the quiet end of a mountain arc that began
so abruptly at the shores of the Mediterranean.
As a whole, this mountain range encapsulates
what it means for natural spaces to serve its
community, as a place to rest and explore, as a
playground and a retreat. While its natural beauty
is at the mercy of our pursuit for development,
there are still countless untouched pockets of
wilderness left to explore, enjoy and protect.
If you want to explore more of the world’s great
mountain ranges, you can continue with these
videos on the Caucasus or the Rocky Mountains.
And if you’d like a more interactive way to
test and grow your geography knowledge, check
out Jordglobe Geography on Google Play or the App
Store, to challenge friends and take part in daily
challenges. The link is in the description below.
See you in the next one, cheers.